a professor at the University of
Maryland asked this awesomely evil test
question you have the opportunity to
earn extra points for this exam select
whether you want two points or six
points but there's a small catch if more
than 10% of the class picks six points
then no one will get any points only I
will see your selection it will be
anonymous to the rest of the class do
you pick two points or six points when
this question was posted to Twitter it
went viral with a lot of people
discussing the question it looks like
there's a dilemma here and a lot of
people thought that look if we at least
picks two points if everyone can
cooperate then at least we can get two
but that's not the game theory way to
think about this question so let's try
and analyze what the correct strategic
decision should be given the incentives
of this question you want to think about
your choice relative to what the other
people in the class are doing and the
relevant characteristic is how many
people are picking six it could be that
more than 10% of the class's picking six
it could be the case that fewer than 10%
of the class is picking six or there's a
small probability that may be exactly
10% of the other people are picking six
will construct a matrix based on what
the other people are doing to see what
your payoff will be if more than 10% of
the class is picking six then it doesn't
matter whether you pick two or six
everyone is going to get zero points now
if fewer than 10% of the other people
are picking six say everyone else is
picking two then you are going to get
the number of points that you pick if
you pick two points you'll get two if
you pick six points you'll get six and
now you can see something very
interesting
you are always better off at least as
good off picking six as if you are
picking two so picking six here is a
logical choice whether the class is more
than 10% picking six or less than 10%
pick
six you are always going to score more
points if you pick six versus two now
there's one third case to consider is
that maybe exactly 10% pick six in this
case you would get two if you pick two
but you would ruin it for everyone and
get zero if you pick six you would you
know increase the threshold beyond 10%
so in this one small scenario you are
actually better off picking two points
but it's kind of rare and there's no way
you can know that exactly 10% of the
class is picking six so in a class of
ten that would be exactly one person
picking six and everyone else picking
two this is a very unlikely scenario so
you can kind of disregard this third
possibility and you could say picking
six is the logical thing to do but
there's another reason to think about
why picking six is logical exams are not
usually based on the absolute number of
points you get it's not usually a point
threshold that 90% is an 80 percents of
B that's usually true in grade school or
high school but once you get to college
everything is usually graded on occur
your grade is based on how much better
you do relative to everyone else so you
don't want to think about the absolute
number of points you're getting you want
to think about how many more points
you're getting than other people so when
you think in this relativistic method if
you get two and everyone else gets to
you're getting zero extra points whereas
if you get six and other people get two
then you have a chance to get four extra
points so we want to reduce the payouts
when points are awarded by two so if the
class is getting more than 10 percents
picking six no one's getting points
anyway if fewer than 10% are picking six
then when you pick two if everyone gets
two you're not getting any more points
than anyone else who's picking two but
if you get six and other people are
getting two you got four extra points
and then look at the third scenario
where exactly 10% is picking six so say
one in 10 out of your 10 burs and class
is picking six
and one person speaking six everyone
else is picking two now if you pick two
then you're not going to do any better
than the people who are picking two and
if you pick six and spoil it for
everyone then you get zero so when you
look at the payouts now picking six is
always at least as good as picking two
so in this case picking six is the
logical choice and it's what's known as
a weakly dominant strategy so when you
have a weakly dominant strategy you're
gonna want to play it now the
unfortunate outcome even though everyone
individually is thinking about picking
six and they all pick six you end up in
a situation that everyone ends up with
zero points but this is not because any
individual person is thinking wrong this
game is sort of rigged so that the group
outcome sort of says oh you pick six
you're selfish but that's not really the
case I think it should be your decision
to pick six and that's the logical thing
to do thanks for watching this video if
you like more videos about game theory
and math please subscribe to my channel
you can catch me on my blog mind your
decisions which you can follow on
Facebook Google+ and patreon you can
also catch me on social media at
pressure Walker and if you like this
video please check out my books I've
written a book about game theory and
introduction to strategic thinking which
will help you understand this example
and many more ways to use math to
outsmart your opponents